cran-comments.md, before:

INDperform 0.2.2
================

## Release summary

Fixed some bugs and made some minor changes to improve usability.
Fixed the notes and particularly error message under different R versions and platforms caused by the changes to matrix objects in the newer versions, as was requested by the CRAN team.

## Test environments

* macOS 10.14.5 on local install, R 3.6.1, and macOS 10.15.2 on local R 3.6.2 install
* ubuntu 16.04 on travis-ci (R-devel, R-release, R-oldrelease)
* win-builder (R-devel, R-release, R-oldrelease)

## R CMD check results

There were no ERRORs, WARNINGs or NOTES:

## Reverse dependencies

There are currently no downstream dependencies for this package.



INDperform 0.2.1
================

## Release summary

Fixed the warning caused by changes in the random sampling algorithm when calling set.seed() in tests as was requested by the CRAN team.

## Test environments

* macOS 10.14.5 on local install, R 3.6.1
* ubuntu 16.04 on travis-ci (R-devel, R-release, R-oldrelease)
* win-builder (R-devel, R-release, R-oldrelease)

## R CMD check results

There were no ERRORs or WARNINGs but 1 NOTE:
  
*New submission

Package was archived on CRAN

Possibly mis-spelled words in DESCRIPTION:
  al (13:76)
  et (13:73)

CRAN repository db overrides:
  X-CRAN-Comment: Archived on 2019-04-22 as check errors were not
    corrected despite reminders. *
  
I am referring to my paper Otto et al. (2018) in the Description section and don't know how to write it in a way to not receive a note.  

## Reverse dependencies

There are currently no downstream dependencies for this package.



INDperform 0.2.0
================

## Release summary

This major update has incorporated the tidy evaluation principles from the recent tidyverse packages, which also fixes a bug that would have occurred with the upcoming release of dplyr 0.8.0. Soft-deprecated SE tidyverse function (SE versions) are no longer used to avoid future code breaks and variables in dataframes are accessed as unquoted symbols converted from strings using !!rlang::sym(). All aesthetic mappings are based on variables within dataframes instead single vectors as before.

Other changes include different statistics computations and added functionality through new standalone functions. Some bugs were also fixed.


## Test environments

* local OS X install, R 3.5.0
* local OS X install, R 3.5.2
* win-builder (devel and release)

## R CMD check results 

There were 0 errors, 0 warnings and 0 notes.



## Reverse dependencies

There are currently no downstream dependencies for this package.

Commit message:

added note of data size

cran-comments.md, after:

INDperform 0.2.2
================

## Release summary

Fixed some bugs and made some minor changes to improve usability.
Fixed the notes and particularly error message under different R versions and platforms caused by the changes to matrix objects in the newer versions, as was requested by the CRAN team.

## Test environments

* macOS 10.14.5 on local install, R 3.6.1, and macOS 10.15.2 on local R 3.6.2 install
* ubuntu 16.04 on travis-ci (R-devel, R-release, R-oldrelease)
* win-builder (R-devel, R-release, R-oldrelease)

## R CMD check results

There were no ERRORs or WARNINGs but 1 NOTE:

> checking installed package size ... NOTE
   installed size is  5.0Mb
    sub-directories of 1Mb or more:
      data   3.1Mb
      help   1.6Mb
      
The data needs to have this size, so there is nothing I can do about.


## Reverse dependencies

There are currently no downstream dependencies for this package.



INDperform 0.2.1
================

## Release summary

Fixed the warning caused by changes in the random sampling algorithm when calling set.seed() in tests as was requested by the CRAN team.

## Test environments

* macOS 10.14.5 on local install, R 3.6.1
* ubuntu 16.04 on travis-ci (R-devel, R-release, R-oldrelease)
* win-builder (R-devel, R-release, R-oldrelease)

## R CMD check results

There were no ERRORs or WARNINGs but 1 NOTE:
  
*New submission

Package was archived on CRAN

Possibly mis-spelled words in DESCRIPTION:
  al (13:76)
  et (13:73)

CRAN repository db overrides:
  X-CRAN-Comment: Archived on 2019-04-22 as check errors were not
    corrected despite reminders. *
  
I am referring to my paper Otto et al. (2018) in the Description section and don't know how to write it in a way to not receive a note.  

## Reverse dependencies

There are currently no downstream dependencies for this package.



INDperform 0.2.0
================

## Release summary

This major update has incorporated the tidy evaluation principles from the recent tidyverse packages, which also fixes a bug that would have occurred with the upcoming release of dplyr 0.8.0. Soft-deprecated SE tidyverse function (SE versions) are no longer used to avoid future code breaks and variables in dataframes are accessed as unquoted symbols converted from strings using !!rlang::sym(). All aesthetic mappings are based on variables within dataframes instead single vectors as before.

Other changes include different statistics computations and added functionality through new standalone functions. Some bugs were also fixed.


## Test environments

* local OS X install, R 3.5.0
* local OS X install, R 3.5.2
* win-builder (devel and release)

## R CMD check results 

There were 0 errors, 0 warnings and 0 notes.



## Reverse dependencies

There are currently no downstream dependencies for this package.
